Welcome to Barabus Road Church. We're glad you're here. If you're streaming because you're stuck in the freeway traffic, we welcome you when you get here. You can hear our voices. Um, but yeah, we're glad you're all here. This is such a blessing to come together as a church, the bride of Christ, the local assembly right here in San Diego that God has brought together in order to glorify him, to honor him. And we are all pilgrims here. We're we're all here for a temporary season. Some will be born in this church, born again here, baptized, raised up, served their whole life. Yet, we're still pilgrims in this church. We're all here for a season. So, the question is for you, where are you going to be in a hundred years? In 1,000 years from now, where will you be? Where will you be a million years from now? And to keep that internal perspective helps us realize how special this time is together, but how momentary it is. We're we're here together as pilgrims for a final destination and to invite others in to the fold. And here's what God says to us in the last chapter of the Bible. Where will you be in a million years? And it says this. Then the angel showed me the river of the water of life, bright as crystal, flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb. Through the middle of the street of the city, also on either side of the river, the tree of life with its 12 kinds of fruit, yielding its fruit each month. The leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations. No longer will there be any curse, but the throne of God and the Lamb will be in it, and his servants will worship him. They will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads. Neither night will be there. They will need no light of lamp or sun, for the Lord God will be their light, and they will reign forever and ever. What what a joy to be part of that holy assembly. And we are counted in these people. We're here for a season. So let's sing to praise while we have breath in our voice. Let's stand together and sing. All creatures of our God and King, lift up your voice and with us sing. Oh, praise him. Hallelu. Thou burning sun with golden beam. Thou silver moon with softer glee. Oh praise him. Oh praise him. Hallelu. Hallelu. Hallelu. Let all things their creator bless and worship him in humbleness. Oh, praise him. Hallelu. Praise praise the father. Praise the son. And praise the spirit. Three in one. Oh, praise him. Oh, praise him. Hallelu. Hallelu. Hallelu. All the redeemed washed by his blood. Come and rejoice in his great love. Oh, praise him. Hallelujah. Christ has defeated every sin. Cast all your burdens now on him. Oh, praise him. Oh, praise him. Halleluah. Hallelu. Hallelu. >> He shall return in power to reign. Heaven and earth will join to sing. Oh, praise him. Halleluah. And who shall fall on men in me? All creatures of our God and King. Oh, praise him. Oh, praise him. Hallelu. Hallelu. Oh, praise him. Oh, praise him. Halleluah. Halleluah. Hallelu. How firm the foundation ye saints of the Lord is laid for your faith in his excellent word. What more can he say than to you he has said to you for refuge to Jesus I fled. Fear not. I am with thee. Oh, be not dismayed, for I am thy God, and will still give thee aid. I'll strengn thee, help thee, and cause thee to stand. upheld by my rightous nipples hand. When through fiery trials, thy pathway shall light. My grace all sufficient shall be thy suff. The flame shall not hurt thee. Thy only desire. Thy draws to consume and thy gold to refine. The soul that on Jesus had led for repose. I will not. I will not deserve to expose. That soul though all hell should endeavor to shake. I'll never no never no never forsake that soul though all hell should endeavor to shake I'll never no never forsake When I survey, thou wonder on which the prince of Glory died. My richest pain I count my loss and pour contempt on all my pride. For it, Lord, that I should boast. Save in the death of Christ my God. All the vain things that harm me most. I sacriice them to his love. The from his hand, his hands, his feet. Sorrow and love flowing go down. In there such love and sorrow meet. Oh thorns compost so rich of ground. The whole realm of nature mind that were a present for you to fall. A so amazing, so divine. Dance my soul, my life, my own. So amazing, so divine. Dance my soul, my light, my own. You may be seated. Well, just a few updates today about the life of our church. The men had a wonderful walk yesterday morning. Just enjoyed some time of fellowship and enjoying God's creation and time together. And as we think through the life of our church, keep in mind the the daily activities that are part of our church are really incredible. They they are here to nurture you, to help you, to lead you, to guide you, and and those are are life groups. To be part of a life group is really to invest your life in one another, in the life of our church, for you to minister to others and for others to minister to you. So you are part of the family of God here in our local assembly. And then on Sunday mornings we have our inductive Bible study which opens up the passage that Pastor Matt preaches through each week. Allows you to get into it. Allows you to really meditate on it prior to the sermon. It it gives you an extra layer of nutrition in your heart and your mind as you meditate on it and it prepares you to hear the sermon at hand. And then we have our prayer time together as well. And we had a 75% increase in attendance this week. So that was a big answer to prayer. That was a big blessing. And then Tuesday nights, Pastor Matt engages our hearts and our minds with the topics that are very relevant and fresh in the world in which we live in. And these shouldn't be taken for granted. These aren't just, oh, those are the things we do. What about the special things? These are the the daily whoop and wararf of the life of our church to feed you, to nurture you, to minister to you. And then of course our our sacred time together as a holy assembly to hear the word of God preached in the power of the spirit to come together and sing. These are all just the wonderful things of the life of our church. So um invite others to them, be a part of them and appreciate them for what they are. We don't want to keep you busy in the building just running around playing games all the time. You are called to be lights and witnesses out in the world and your families and your workplaces, in your neighborhoods. Be a Christian where God has you. He has good works prepared for you. So we prepare, we equip, we encourage, and you go out and let's go to the Lord in prayer. Father, we are so grateful to be called Christians, to be considered a church, and we know that Christ has died for his bride, Lord. And he is continuing desire to wash us in the word, to sanctify us, to make us more pure and holy. And we realize we are a gift from you to your son, Lord. We are a sacred people, not deserving of your grace, of your mercy. But because of your great wisdom, love, and act upon us, you've allowed us to be born again, to be part of the holy assembly of the saints for all eternity. We ask that we would understand that more fully, that we belong to you, that we are yours, that we've been bought with a price, and that our lives would be devoted to that. So purify this church through the preaching of your word. Purify this church through our love for one another. And purify this church through your means of sanctification that you may be honored. Christ may be glorified and that we may be a light and a beacon for not only this community, not only this nation, but for the whole globe as we are able to participate with those who go out to the ends of the earth. We need your blessing upon this congregation and we pray it in Jesus name. Amen. Thanks, Paul. >> Well, welcome, welcome. You made it through the time change, which is always the worst uh time change every year for me. Uh it always comes after we've had a week at Shepherd's Conference. I'm always fatigued. That's how I know it's time change. It's right when I'm feeling the need for some extra sleep and they're like, "Time change? I've done it for so many years. I I kind of enjoy the pain of it every year now." Um, but a couple things just really quick that I want to say. Uh, first, if you're interested in your bulletin, there's a QR code. So, I wrote a little book. It's called Mere Membership. It's out. You can get it now and Amazon. Yeah, that's right. That's fun. It's I didn't dedicate it to y'all in the book. I'm not good at that. I forgot honestly to do that part, but I'll say it verbally now. It's dedicated to you guys to the saints at Bravaso Church. It is a book about membership. It's called Mere Membership, which is sort of a play on the CS Lewis' mere Christianity. I I the emphasis of it was really the communion table. to explain sort of how we viewed how I viewed membership and and you know for the years that we've had and it's a very modest book. I don't expect this to ever be like something that is a bestseller but I would say if you're interested in reading it um it's about ecclesiology about membership and really the communion table and what makes the church visible. And so if you're ever wondering I' I'd highly recommend uh you get it. Uh there's again you can click the QR code. You have to buy it. Uh unfortunately that's just how we do it uh these days. it's much easier to write in that way. Um, but if you're able to do so and you do read it and you do actually uh think it slaps, as the first uh review said, uh, feel free to put a review up there. That'd be pretty awesome. Um, the Kindle the Kindle version is is there too, but I would love to know that you guys read it at some point and all that. So, um, to that end, let me just say a quick prayer myself. Well, no, let's not do that. Let's find the text. We're in Deuteronomy chapter 1, and we're doing a smaller section. So, find Deuteronomy chapter 1 and, uh, we're going to start in verse 6. So go and stand with me. Deuteronomy 1 starting with verse 6. We're going to go to verse 18. Deuteronomy 1 verse 6 to18. Mere Deuteronomy here. This is the holy word. The Lord our God said to us in Horeb, "You've stayed long enough at this mountain. Turn and take your journey and go to the hill country of the Amorites and to all their neighbors in the Arabah and the hill country and to the lowland and to the Ngeb and by the sea coast the land of the Canaanites and Lebanon as far as the great river the river Euphrates. See I have set the land before you. Go in and take possession of the land that the Lord swore to your fathers to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob to give to them to their offspring after them. At that time I said to you, I'm not able to bear you by myself. The Lord your God has multiplied you. And behold, you are today as numerous as the stars of heaven. May the Lord, the God of your fathers, make you a thousand times as many as you are, and bless you as he has promised you. How can I bear by myself the weight and burden of you and your strife? Choose for your tribes wise, understanding, and experienced men, and I will appoint them as your heads. And you answered me, "The thing you've spoken is good for us to do." So I took the heads of your tribes, wise and experienced men, and set them as heads over you, commanders of thousands, commanders of hundreds, commanders of 50s, commanders of tens, and officers throughout your tribes. And I charge your judges at that time, hear the cases between your brothers, and judge righteously between a man and his brother, or the alien who is with him. You shall not be partial in judgment. You shall hear the small and the great alike. You shall not be intimidated by anyone. For the judgment is God's. And the case that is too hard for you, you shall bring to me and I will hear it. And I commanded you at that time all the things that you should do. Let's pray. Father, as we come to this passage today, I'm just so thankful for the privilege. I just never I was reflecting this week, Lord, and just never I can't thank you enough that you've called me to be a pastor, allowed me to preach your word and have brought forth a congregation that loves to hear it. Father, we're in the book of Deuteronomy, a a masterful work of art. There's so much in it. And in this evangelical culture, even wonderful Christians who mean well ignore this book. Lord, I'm so thankful for a congregation that's eager to hear it. Help us to understand these truths, to help us to understand the power of your word. Help us to see Christ in all of scripture. And more than ever before, Lord, help us to apply these truths in such a way that you would be glorified. We praise you in Jesus name. Amen. You may be seated. All right. So, we started off in verse six, and it's the middle of a a sentence really. And Deuteronomy is an interesting book. We talked about last week the last week's sermon was uh in the wilder or that was numbers was in the wilderness last week's sermon was these are the words and which is the the first sort of sentence of Deuteronomy and again the word Deuteronomy means second law and so that's what we tend to think of it as and this is uh you know it's understandable that we'd think well that's kind of boring first of I heard it once I don't really want the rerun of the law that doesn't sound very fun but as we talked about last week Deuteronomy is a powerful book one of the most quoted books in the New Testament one of the most quoted books by Jesus It's the book Jesus again turned to when hell pressed in as he was in his temptation against Satan after his baptism. It's an impactful book. But the reason I believe we don't understand it truly is that we just miss the plot. And that's challenging, right? Because the plot is that you had all this stuff happen. You had Genesis, then you had the story of which ends with these people in slavery, these brothers in slavery. the nation of Israel is formed in Egypt and they come out of Egypt through the plagues and and through Pharaoh and what going through the Red Sea and the amazing story of of Egypt and Moses and then we get out of that whole story and we go from Exodus into the latter half of Exodus which is on Mount Si and the giving of the law and and then all the commands to build the tabernacle and then a lot of chapters on the tent pegs and how big and the measurements and the the things to build and that's where maybe in Bible reading plan, you start to get a little fatigued a little bit. But these things are important. They're reminding us of the tangible nature. Uh that that God's real. He wanted to be experienced in the real world. Touch, taste, smell, right? That these these sort of ideas here. After that, we come through Exodus and we get to Leviticus. And this is where things really get challenging for us if we aren't understanding what happens. Leviticus is the instruction manual for the tabernacle. It's it's the the way we understand how to use the tabernacle, how to use the the offerings and the sacrifices and what they meant and what they mean. We come through that in the story. We're still on Mount Si. And the story progresses then in the book of Numbers. In the book of Numbers, it begins with a census. And that census is them in the wilderness after they'd been at Mount Si. And God tells them to go forth at Kadesh Barnea. They're about to go on the the precipice of the promised land. And they blow it. And they spend 40 years in the wilderness on a journey that was supposed to take 11 days. And everyone dies. All the parents dies. A terrible book of failure. God's faithful throughout. And here they go at the end of this whole passage. And here's Moses now standing in the same place they were 40 years earlier, giving a speech to them, reinterpreting to them the events that we all read. Now, if we don't understand that, the whole book doesn't make sense. In fact, it's so challenging to get what I'm telling you that the natural propensity if if you looked out nine commentaries, they're going to tell you that this passage we're in today is a passage about leadership and organization and structure. Let's look at the first five verses to understand what's going on. So again, Deuteronomy begins this way. These are the words that Moses spoke to all Israel beyond the Jordan in the wilderness of the Araba opposite Suf between Piran and Tofell, Laban, Hazra, and Dahab. You're like, it's really you're like that's great, Matt. The key here is that it's in the wilderness. These are the words that he spoke in the wilderness. That's the key. That's numbers. The book of Numbers was called in the wilderness. And so these are the words he spoke on the edge of that wilderness between the wilderness and the promised land. Verse two, it is 11 days journey from Horeb by the way of Mount Seir to Kadesh Barnea. In the 40th year on the first day of the 11th month, Moses spoke to the people of Israel according to all that the Lord had given him in commandment to them. So here he is after being in that wilderness 11 days journey farther down the road but it took him 40 years to get there. And so here's Moses now giving a speech essentially explaining this. The concept here is after verse four he had defeated Sehon the king of the Amorites who lived in Heshbon and Og the king of Bashan who lived in Ashtar and Edri beyond the Jordan in the land of Moab. Moses undertook to explain this law saying and then it begins our passage and this passage is a a passage that's hearkening back to essentially the beginning of numbers the the the command to go forth from the mountain of Sinai where they they'd kind of lingered for almost a year while Moses got the law given to him. This is like kind of the picture here. In other words, what we're reading in this this Deuteronomy is a bunch of speeches to Moses and we're going to get to this a little bit later. These speeches have a purpose. They're not just random sermons. Moses is giving sermons in the same way that an ancient sort of treaty was made, a vassal treaty would be made. He was putting these together as sort of establishing the past and what's going on and getting them to understand where they're coming from, what they're agreeing to, establishing the purpose of the law. But none of this was was what we think it is. When we understand this, the the question of how they got here is very relevant to them at the beginning of this whole thing. In other words, what Moses is doing, what we're reading, what we're studying in Deuteronomy is a series of sermons that is recontextualizing and reinterpreting or or hearing how Moses is interpreting to them what we read. And you're like, well, that's that's challenging. I'm like, well, it is and it isn't. If we don't know the events and we just read this, that's fine. Okay. But the the people knew the events intimately because after 40 years of failure in that wilderness wandering around all of their parents, every single one of the people he's speaking to, their parents are dead. Not some, all of them. That's the premise of this moment. And they died after having failed so miserably. These are the ones that built the tabernacle. These are the ones that walked through the Red Sea. A lot of these people were little kids at the time. 20 years later, 40 years later, these are the ones that were young children had those things happen. They remembered as children watching the Passover feast and celebrating this feast and watching the fear of their parents, watching the the the the thirst in the desert, watching the commands, watching the mana from heaven, watching the fire and the smoke by night, they grew up watching all of these things. And so as Moses refraraming their failure, we get to this section here and I was going to skip it. What do I mean by that? I did last week's sermon and my plan was just to finish this chapter and just get into the failure part. And in my outlining, as I was going through it over and over again, I realized this part was super annoying. I couldn't get past it. It was an emphasis that irritated me because I'm like, why does he keep bringing up this? Why bring up the appointment of leaders and how wise it was and emphasize it? I mean, you as he's editorializing the events, you don't really need to get to that. In fact, I just editorialized all the events just now, right? It seems, you know, pretty easy to do. I just did it. And it's it's helpful to remember that there's a there's a similar picture to what's happening here. And if you go to the book of Acts, it's helpful. Acts chapter 7. This is really after my study so far of Deuteronomy. I might change this, but as of right now, I would argue that Deuteronomy is essentially Steven's sermon in the book of Acts by Moses to the people, reminding them of what's going on. And so, here's what happens. Stephen is kind of like a New Testament Moses in a way. This is after the the church has begun in Pentecost. The Jews have been rejecting it, resisting it over and over again. This is the sermon that spread the church across the world. And Steven gives it to the the Jewish people in Jerusalem after Jesus had been raised from the dead about uh their fathers. And he's doing the same thing Moses doing. He's reinterpreting their history. Look at Acts 7:1. It says, "And the high priest said, "Are these things so?" And Steven said, "Brothers and fathers, hear me. The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia before he lived in Haron and said to him, "Go out from your land and from your kindred and go into the land that I will show you." And he goes on, but notice he starts with Abraham. He says, "Let me tell you a story." And he goes all the way back to Abraham. It'd be the the same as me saying, "Well, why matter are we going to vote this way or do this thing?" I'm like, "Well, it all began back in 1776 with a man named George Washington." You're like, "That's what's happening here." and he goes through their history and as you go through Steven's sermon, it's long. It's it's a very long sermon. In fact, if you get down to chapter same chapter 7 and you've turned the page probably, yeah, I'm hearing pages turning, right? That's cuz it's a long sermon. Wherever you are in verse one, let me just out of curiosity, I mean, does anyone have a Bible with small enough print where you're on the same page from verse one to verse 51? Does anyone's Bible have that? I'm just curious who's the best sight person in this room. Nobody. We had to turn the page. It's a long sermon. Verse 51 is the end of his sermon and this is what he's leading to. He says, "You stiff necked people." That means stubborn, uncircumcised in heart and ears, that means callous. You always resist the Holy Spirit. As your fathers did, so do you. Which of the prophets did your fathers not persecute? and they killed those who announced beforehand the coming of the the coming of the righteous one whom you've now betrayed and murdered. You who received the law as delivered by angels and did not keep it. Steven's point is that them crucifying Christ comes after a long line of them rejecting God's sent people. His whole argument is that they are staying in character in having crucified Christ and in rejecting him even in that moment. Verse 54, when they heard these things, they were in a rage and they ground their teeth at him. They tried to stone him to death and they did. And this is where the Apostle Paul was with them. And this is what spread the church forward. But my purpose of bringing up Steven's sermon is to remind you that in those those verses, those that turn of the page you made just now to get to the end of the sermon, he's just telling the story of the Old Testament, which is a challenging thing to read because if you're not paying attention, you're like, "Yeah, I feel like I've read these stories." He's just telling us the same story. But that's not what he's doing. He's giving a sermon where every detail and example he's using is serving a purpose, a theme that he's moving to, which is what I'm doing in a sermon. The the sentences I'm telling you, the words I'm saying are moving to a theme. And if you're not used to hearing sermons that are like good ones, you're not used to that idea. Steven did not say, and there's nothing wrong with sermons like this. He did not say, "Here's three ways that we know." He was like he was moving to a theme. And his whole story was giving the details of this one theme. you stiff necked people who always resist what God's doing. Who killed the Lord Jesus Christ. That was his whole sermon. He's like, "This is in your history. It's what you've done." Now, if you go back to Deuteronomy, what the what Moses is doing is something a bit similar with a different tone. Moses is doing sort of the same thing. In this first speech, he's doing something again to tell them about that they're pretty stiff necked people. They're coming from a generation of people who've had everything and rejected the Lord. But this section on leadership is still challenging. If every detail of the sermon is serving a purpose, if every detail of the sermon is making a point, how does giving us his leadership and their wise counsel and the clarity of God's mission? How does that help us to see the point he's making that Moses is making which is coming up next week which is about their failure and rejection really and their unbelief. How does this section serve to make his case about their unbelief? And I'd argue today that what's happening right now is that Moses is telling us these things not because we're supposed to have a seminar on good leadership and organization in the church, but to show that even with good organization and leadership, they failed and they fall. In other words, he's trying to intensify their guilt. When we get to the spies, when we get to their rejection, we already know the clarity, the clarity of their mission and the wisdom and the structure of their nation didn't stop them from falling and failing. So, put it together for a second. They had already walked through the Red Sea on dry land. They had already watched and lived through the Exodus of Egypt. They already watched the Egyptians that they were, you know, holding them captive give them all their money. They were already freed from slavery. They were already carrying the gold of their slave owners. They had already seen God work miracles every single day. They watched Pharaoh's army drown in the Red Sea. They watched the smoke and the fire by day and by night. And now we know, and this is what Moses is doing at the front end, we know not only do they see these miracles, but they had a clear command and a wise organization. In other words, they had all the accountability structures that we want. And still they failed. In the same chapter in verse 26, Moses says to them, "Yet you would not go up, but rebelled against the command of the Lord your God." In other words, Israel had everything necessary except faith. Guys, we need this passage right now, if nothing else, to purge ourselves from the ridiculous middle management solutions we're so prone to see and to put upon the church. What do I mean? What do I mean? So many I I I've been a Christian for like since 2002. To me, that doesn't seem like a long time, and I feel old already. I've watched so many prominent men fall. Literally, multiple times, I'd be at the a conference or what have you, and I'd be like, "Oh, that was my favorite preacher." And then later find out that he's been having affairs for eight years. When I first was starting to preach, people like, you know, you remind me of this Mark Driscoll guy. I'm like, oh goodness, please don't ever compare me to Mark Driscoll. I'm sure he's a nice guy. And then he blows up. I used to like a book by Philip Yansy, the Jesus I never knew. Yeah, he's kind of a liberal. Yeah, whatever. But then you find out that he'd been having an eight-year affair and I think he has MS, which and he's in his 80s, which shows you that you just really can't grow out of your sin. Nothing wrong with being 80 or having MS. It doesn't mean you're not attractive. It was just, come on, man. He's a like you have to work hard to have an affair at that point. And yet he did. We've heard stories, prominent men embezzling money, running to foreign countries with prostitutes. One of the first guys I ever spoke on a stage with, it was a church planting guy, found out that he had been spending the church's raised funds on prostitutes. Later he said he was doing research. You know, we we watch the fall. We watch people fall away. We watch it happen over and over again, and we get the same tired and stupid remarks over and over again. You know, the church really needs to have accountability structures. Well, Matt, who holds you accountable? It's a great question. Every time something goes wrong, we turn to accountability structures and organizations and structures. Maybe they didn't have enough quiet time. Maybe they're too busy with their workload, you know? That's why we shouldn't give people a big a big platform, you know, or the problem wasn't their organization and their structures or the problem wasn't those things. The problem is that there weren't man men of God. This whole story is trying to slap us in the face with our intentions in this. I'm not saying the organizations and structures and accountability are bad. It just doesn't solve the things that we think they do. Imagine the accountability structures and still having those same men leading. Would you want that? Would you want them to like want to do that? Like like for example in our government we had these checks and balances and many people wouldn't want like would you want Donald Trump in the pulpit with like the Congress stopping him and like well he was going to say sinful things but they said no and then he was going to like is that what we want? And so what what what Moses is getting them to see is something we desperately need to hear. Moses shows them and us that our real problem is not the things that we think we need. Right? Our problem is not primarily a lack of information. It's not primarily our structures. It's not primarily our accountability groups. And it's not primarily our methodology. It's not because we're a big church or a small church. It's not because we didn't use the KJV or because we use the NIV. It's not because we didn't speak in tongues. It's not because we uh well, were you a congregational church, a voting church? Were you an elder church? Well, that must be the issue. Oh, by the way, I can point to a million congregational churches that are that fell. Oh, by the way, I can point to a million elder churches that have fallen. It was a church council that crucified Christ. So, councils don't seem to do a good job. Our problem is our unbelief, our lack of courage, our lack of faith. There's two movements in the sermon. The first is the verses 6 to8. I've titled it, we do not need more clarity. We need more courage. And the second one, verses 9 to 18, we do not need better methods. We need better men. So let's look at this first part, verse six. We already know Moses preaching a sermon. The per first point of his sermon here references the clarity of their mission. In other words, the the people that he was speaking to at the time in his story didn't didn't it wasn't a military campaign that they rejected. It wasn't like, you know, right now people like, I don't know what I feel about the war in Iran. I'm like, yeah, that's great because you were probably doing something else and all like war in Iran that wasn't on my bingo card, right? Like, and so you're like, I wonder if I like that or not. That is not what going into the land was. It was not a a a new thing on the bingo card. This was something else. And that's what Moses is trying to draw forth for them. In verse six, he says, "The Lord our God said to us in Horeb," this is going back 40 years to the beginning of this whole story. "You have stayed long enough at this mountain." Talking about Mount Si. Horeb means Mount Si. And he said, and God says, you've stayed long enough at this mountain. You get the impression that they weren't lingering there while God was giving the Ten Commandments because God was just being rude. There's a reason they had stayed there. I'll get to that in just a minute. You stayed long enough at this mountain. Turn and take your journey. That's the title of the sermon. Turn and take your journey. In other words, time to come down the mountain. Time to come forward and go out of this and take your journey and go to the hill country of the Amorites. Now, we don't pay at least I don't typically pay attention. When you hear these names of ancient people, you're like, "What? Whatever. I just got to pronounce them so I don't get them wrong when I'm preaching." Um, but no, it matters. The Amorites matter. There are people. It matters in the story. He goes, "Turn and go to the go to the the hill country of the Amorites. You know, you're going to you're going to steal their land. It's stolen land. It was the Amorites for us." God's like, "No, no, it's your land. Why?" He goes, "Go to them and all their neighbors in the Arab and the Hill Country and the lowlands and the negab by the sea coast, the land of the Canaanites in Lebanon, as far as the great river Euphrates." So, this is a big stretch of land. And he says in verse eight, "See, I have set the land before you." literally see I've given it to you. God's like, "It's yours." Imagine you come out on a I always wonder on those commercials. I don't watch commercials really anymore cuz I don't watch the television except now they're putting on like Hulu and stuff. So, I guess I do. But back in the day, they used to have commercial I used to see all the time around Christmas where someone would have, I don't know, hot cocoa and they'd come out like this and there's a car with a bow on it. And I was wondering like who's buying cars with a bow on it? If you had the money to buy a car with a bow, are you buying a Subaru? I don't know. Nothing wrong with Subarus, but that seems to be a big purchase. If you're kind of don't have a lot of money, I feel like my wife would be upset with me if I she came out with a car with a bow, which is the type of thing I could imagine myself doing, perhaps. We'll figure it out, honey. Isn't this great? It's a gift. The point is, when you take them outside and you say, "Hey, maybe there's something outside for you." And you open the door, it's theirs. I have the keys. Let's say you're 16 and none of you in my family if you're 16 are getting a car. Okay, this none of this is for you, but for somebody else in the commercial, here's the keys. See, I've set before you. It's yours. That's what this means. It's not like, hey, check it out. Wouldn't that be nice? Wouldn't it be cool if you could have it? The God who is just, you understand, God is talking to people. He has brought them out of Egypt. He's is like humiliated Pharaoh. He's taking He says, "I'm going to like everything he said has happened." He goes, "This is yours. Turn from here. Go take your journey. Take it. I've set it before you. See, I've set the land before you. Go in and take it. Take possession of the land that the Lord swore to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob to give to them and their offspring after them, to you." essentially. I've given this to you, and I swore that this land was yours to your fathers. Now, notice who Moses speaks of. He says Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Well, let's start with Jacob. Go back to Genesis 35 briefly. I just want you to see what I mean here. What is being what Moses is doing? Because what we're trying to do is to understand and feel. I want you to feel the sermon that Moses is giving as if you're them. You know, in other words, like let's all go back. We're do, you know, the Israelites here. Like I want you to feel the impact. So that means we have to be familiar with some of these things he's saying. In Genesis 35:1, let's start with Jacob. We'll go backwards. Okay. Verse 11. 3511. This is God speaking to Jacob. Jacob is the one who's called Israel later. This is their most recent patriarch. And God said to him to Jacob, "I am God Almighty. Be fruitful and multiply. A nation and a company of nations shall come from you, and kings shall come from your own body. The land that I gave to Abraham and Isaac, I will give to you, and I will give the land to your offspring after you. Literally, naming them. That's what his promise was. He promised to Jacob, to the nation of Israel, this land. In fact, as you go through Genesis, you'll notice that he actually promises it to Jacob three separate times. We're not going to turn to him. I just gave you one. Before Jacob, he promised it to Jacob. Jacob's father, Isaac. Go back to Genesis 26. And just look at verse one. This is God one of this is one of the uh the two times God promised the land specifically and wrote irrevocably to Jacob or to uh Isaac, Jacob's father before him. It says, "Now there was a famine in the land beside the former famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went to Guerrar to Abimc, king of Philistines. And the Lord appeared to him and said,"Do not go down to Egypt. Dwell in the land of which I shall tell you. Sojourn in this land, and I will be with you and will bless you. For to you and to your offspring, I will give all these lands. And I will establish the oath that I swore to Abraham your father. I will multiply your offspring as the stars of heaven. I will give you to you off your offspring all these lands. and in your offspring all the nations of the earth shall be blessed because Abraham obeyed my voice and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws. This is a powerful section. He promises that he's going to give him the lands and and establish the oath that he swore to his father Abraham, all these lands to his offspring. And he says, I'll multiply them as far as the stars of heaven and keep your finger in Genesis. But in our sermon, notice it Moses brings all this up specifically if you go to verse 9 in the next section, right? Verse 10 rather, he says, "The Lord, God has multiplied you, and behold, you are today as numerous as the stars of heaven." What Moses doing in his sermon is trying to get them to see. In fact, if you look at our passage, that's what he's trying to do. I want you to see what God's done. So, we had Jacob had promises. before Jacob, those same promises came to uh to Isaac. And before Isaac, they came to his father to Abraham. And we've covered the story. I even might referenced it last week, but Genesis 15, I want to see it one more time. We won't dig into it super clearly, but this is the original covenant story. And in the story, again, God wants Abraham, he's promised Abraham seven times that he's going to give them the land. And in this one, he makes it the most significant. It is a unilateral promise. Let me just read it to you briefly. It says, "After these things, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision. Fear not, Abram. I'm your shield. Your reward shall be very great." But Abram said, "Oh Lord God, what will you give me? For I continue childless and the heir of my house is Eleazar of Damascus." So God's promising Abraham these things. We had no children. This is so significant because here's Israel standing the other side as numerous as the stars of heaven as Moses said and they're seeing the faith of Abraham borne out on the other side of faith has been sight. But in the meantime back with Abraham 400 years earlier and Abram said, "Behold, you've given me no offspring and a member of my household will be my heir. And behold, the word of the Lord came to him. This man shall not be your heir. Your very own son shall be your heir, Isaac," who we just read about. And he brought him outside and said, 'Look toward the heaven and number the stars if you're able to number them.' And he said to him, "So shall your offspring be." And he believed the Lord. He counted it to him as righteousness. This belief in God, this faith in God that Abram had is the faith that we're told that saves us. Which is a simple thing that we believe God, not believing in God, but believing God, which says that my son went and died on a cross for you. Believe the gospel. This is what we hear. We're saved and and born again through the word of God. God says, "This is how you're saved. I believe God that he's given me the righteousness of Christ." And that's what gives me the righteousness of Christ. Wow. But that's not what I'm focused on. Verse 7. He said to him, I am the Lord who brought you out from of the Calaldanss to give you this land to possess. But he said, "Oh Lord God, how am I to know I shall possess it?" And he said to him and bring me a he for three years old. And he basically brings in these animals. He says, "Cut them in half." And again, I told him before, this is how you make a covenant back then. You don't have a a parchment. You don't write on a piece of paper. You don't have a signature. You took animals and you cut them in half. And so before I brought that Subaru home for the Christmas, I would have gone to the car dealership and I said, "Hey, I'm going to I want a loan." And they're like, "Well, we'll give you the car if you pay it back." And they're like, "But let's we're old school, so let's make this serious right now." So they get a bunch of animals, you know, dogs and cats, let's say, and they cut them in the middle like this, which is gross. And they take the two cat, they fling one half of the cat on one side of the driveway, and they fling the other cat on the other side of the driveway. And there's blood. There's a bunch of cats and dogs. And so me and the the car salesman hold hands. Sometimes they believed you made a whatever. I won't even they hold hands. They walk through the the blood. And he says, "Well, here's how we know you're going to pay back this loan. As we walk through this blood, just make sure that if if you stop if you ever don't pay the loan or if I ever take the car back for some reason, then let either of us that do that be cut in half like this animal." We're like, "Yeah, that's great." We just walk back and forth, get our feet stained, or robe stained in blood. good covenant. Cool. Payment will be next week. We made that co. That's the contract. And so that when Abraham says, "How do I know you're going to do it?" God's like, "Let's make a contract. Let me show you." Which is a condescension beyond all I'll I'll all measure. And so he does it. He gets the animals. And then when everything was happening, verse 12, as the sun goes down, a deep fe sleep fell on Abraham, which makes it pretty hard for him to walk through it, right? And then all of a sudden, a dreadful great darkness falls upon him. And then verse 13, the Lord said to Abraham, "Listen to this. know for certain that your offspring will be sojourers in a land that is not theirs. So this is 400 years earlier. He's talking about the offspring of Abraham going into listen this 400 years earlier. Know for sure that your so your offspring will be sojourers in a land that is not theirs and will be servants there and they will be afflicted for 400 years. This is talking about the slavery in Egypt. Moses doesn't even or Abraham doesn't even have Jacob or Isaac yet. But he's saying to your people all this happening. He says God's promising know for certain you're going to have children and those children are going to be slaves in Egypt for 400 years. But I will bring judgment on the nation that they serve and afterward they shall come out with great possessions. And as for you, you shall go to your fathers in peace. You shall be buried in a good old age. And they shall come back here in the fourth generation. For the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet complete. Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet complete. What he's saying is they're going to come back to this place. Now, before we get to the details of that, then God does the craziest thing ever. When the sun had gone down, it was dark. Behold, a smoking firepot and a flaming torch passed between the pieces. And on that day the Lord made a covenant with Abraham saying to your offspring I give this land from the river of Egypt, the great river, the river Euphrates, land of the Kennites, Kennesites, Cadminites, the Hittites, Parites, Refu, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Gegosites, and the Jebusites. So then this contract, imagine the car salesman says to me, his job is say I give you the car. My job is say I pay for the car, right? He says, "Okay, let's do the contract." I'm like, "Yeah." He goes, "Okay, sit over there." I'm like, "Okay." And he goes, "Hold on." And he goes, "I just I swear that I give you this car, and if I don't give you this car, let me be cut in half." I'm like, "Wait, am I supposed to walk through it with you?" Goes, "No, no, no. I just give you this car. My job is to receive it. I've done nothing. It's a unilateral covenant. God himself by himself walks through this to give Abraham certainty that his promises are going to come to pass." And that certainty isn't just certainty vague. It's not vague. It's not the vague stupid prophecies that the stupid fake prophecy people say today. I feel that you're going to have money coming in your future. No, God's very specific. He gives dates and times and people and stuff. It's very specific to Abraham. He says it's going to absolutely happen. And so Moses quotes from all of this, all this stuff. And go back to our passage because notice what he says. Verse 8. Well, first of all, verse six, let's start there. That's where beginning. Lord God said to us in Horeb, "You've stayed long enough this mountain. Turn and take your journey and go to the hill country of the Amorites." Didn't he say, "I'm going to leave you there till the iniquity of the Amorites is complete." Well, apparently that's what's taking place. God's like, "Okay, it's ready. The burrito's done in the microwave. Time to go." Like, it's time. I don't know why that's made if you make burritos and microwaves, but that's what you got. But go. And he lays out all the land, the same land that God said in verse 8. See, I've set the land before you. go in and take possession of the land that the Lord swore to your fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to give them their offspring after them. Moses didn't say to go. He told them first to see. The problem, in other words, that we have to understand here was was not that God's promise was unclear. It was just the opposite. What Moses was doing was taking them all the way back 400 years earlier to the present to show that not only was the they didn't need more clarity. This was the specific moment foretold for over 400 years directly to their forefather Abraham. And they needed to see it. Not they, in other words, before they went in, before they send the spies, God want Moses wanted them to remember like see remember before they did all this stuff, he wanted them to see not the giants, not the the challenges. He wanted to see God's faithfulness to bring them here, the the certainty of his promises. They wanted him to see the Pharaoh's armies in the Red Sea. They wanted to see all of that. They need to see God's faithfulness and the revelation they already had. Look and see what was already given. They didn't need more clarity. And you say to yourself, I mean, can we all agree? Did they need more information? No. Their problem was not more information. That's all I'm trying to say. What do they need to do? They needed the courage to do what? To turn and take your journey. To go forward. That's all they need to do is to trust. And you say, "Wow, it's great. How's it apply to me?" I don't know. Let's try Ephesians 2 just briefly. You know it. There's a lot of passion. I could I could make this about sharing the gospel. I could say Jesus said all authority in heaven and earth is given to me. Go make disciples of all nations. Well, didn't he tell us these things? I'll be with you till the end of the age. And that's great. That's a good passage. I like this one better for this one. I'll tell you why. What Paul does is similar to Moses. He wants us to see what God has done. He wants you to see your life. If you're sitting here right now as a Christian, this is Moses through Paul and me to you. You were dead in the trespasses and sins in which you once walked, following the course of this world, following the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that's now at work in the sons of disobedience, among whom we all once lived in the passions of our flesh, carrying out the desires of the flesh and the mind, and were by nature children of wrath like the rest of mankind. Guys, if you're here right now, that's where you came from. That was your Egypt. But God being rich in mercy because of the great love with which he loved us even when we were dead in our trespasses made us alive together with Christ. By grace you have been saved and raised us up with him and seated us with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus so that in the coming ages he might show the immeasurable riches of his grace and kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. For by grace you have been saved through faith. And this is not your own doing. is a gift of God, not a result of works that no one may boast. Now, here's the key. This is the part that he said. See, look, this takes us back 400 years. This takes us back to your salvation. And here's the turn and take your journey part. For we are his workmanship, his poem. Created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand that we should walk in them. Christian, God not only did that stuff in the past to save you, he saved you for a purpose to walk in good works that he's placed before your feet. And the works placed before your feet might be different than the works placed before my feet, but he's placed good works before your feet. And he wants you to do what? Turn from this mountain and go forward into these good works. He wants you to see God's promises and his faithfulness and not the challenges in front of you. And you know what? I always make fun of the people that say, "Hey, you know, uh, you're not David because, you know, it's like here's the Goliath in your life." And all a sudden I'm changing my mind because right now I'm saying that that you need to see God's promises and not the challenges in front of you. We need to see the same thing. Look what God has done. Look what he has put in front of you. Christian, you do not need more clarity. You need more courage to turn and take your journey. But let's move to the second part because this is where things get really spicy. After saying all this, we get into the management section. And there's nothing super amazingly interesting about this except that it's awesome. Verse 9, at that time I said to you, I'm not able to bear you by myself. The Lord your God has multiplied you, and behold, you are today as numerous as the stars of heaven. May the Lord, the God of your fathers, make you a thousand times as many as you are, and bless you as he's promised you. How can I bear by myself the weight and burden of you in your strife? So verses 9 to 12 describe Moses's feeling of being overwhelmed by God's goodness. And so if you go back, and we don't have time, but in Exodus 18, the way the story actually happened was that it was Moses's father-in-law. Father-in-laws are awesome. I think they're great. I see. I all of a sudden really like father-in-laws because I am one now. And so Jethro was wise, exceedingly wise. And he told tells Moses, "What are you doing meeting with the people all day? You can't do this. Go appoint for yourself people that'll help you." Jethro gave Moses great advice. They saw Moses going from sun up to sun down hearing people's problems. Appoint people to hear the problems. And it's super wise. Like if I was meeting with all of you to counsel, this wouldn't be wise. We have small group leaders. We have other pastors. Like, it's not wise that I'm the guy that meets with you all the time. And there's people that exist in organizations that exist that if they wanted to help me in the church, they're saying, "Hey, Matt, your church is floundering because you're trying to meet with everybody. You're trying to do everything yourself." And you know, Jesus teaches we got to learn to delegate. And and and then here's my book I've got for you. It's called Who Stole My Cheese? Book for Christian Pastors. Like, and what it has like it's a good thing, but there's an entire management solution saying, and again, I'm not there's nothing wrong with management. Jethro's wise. Look at how Moses describes the advice he got. And guys, like that's we need organization and we need we have a plurality of elders for a reason. We have organization for a reason. We have a building and we have to pay rent for a reason. There's things you do organizationally. We're just not like every day like let's shoot for the like you have to do that. And Moses says, "Okay, choose for your tribes wise and understanding, experienced men, and I will appoint them as your heads." And so what happened? And the people answered him. He says, 'You answer me. Notice he doesn't say your fathers. He wants these people to associate that what the previous generation, he doesn't distinguish from them to them. He says this was you. This goes back to their identity. And you answered me, the thing that you've spoken is good for us to do. And so I took the heads of your tribes, wise and experienced men. This is the second time we hear it. And I set them as heads over you. Commanders of thousands, commanders of hundreds, commanders of 50s, commanders of tens, and officers throughout your tribes. And I charged your judges at that time. Look at the organization. Here are the cases between your brothers and judge righteously between a man and his brother and or the alien who's with him. This doesn't mean space aliens. This means soldiers, people like that came out of Egypt or that come from the land that want to be Jewish essentially because you shall not be partial in judgment. You should hear the small and the great alike. You shall not be intimidated by anyone for the judgment is God's. He's like, "Go out with the authority and speak and do these things. And if the case in the case is too hard for you, you shall bring to me and I'll hear it." Moses is saying like, "I don't want to hear all the cases. You should hear them and trust that God's good and your wise understanding and if you get stuck, just come to me and I'll help out." That's good organization. That's good scaffolding, guys. As a just general rule of thumb, like I can't be your best friend, but I am. But maybe I can't if we get more people. Like it's wise that we have people in your groups that are your best friend. Other pastors that meet with you every day. I might get two here and there, but that's like that it'd be unwise for me to say I'm going to have coffee with every single first I'd be so caffeinated. I remember when the church first started, Paul used to have um meet and eats. Pastor Paul meet and eats. And so one day I talked to him like, "How are you doing?" He's like, "I'm so full." He'd just been meeting people for breakfast and lunch and then all of a sudden he's the meet and eats all the time. There's like only so much Moses could do. He's like it's w this is wise. Now it's also wise that you don't do this ahead. I think some churches get in trouble because they had so much structure so early. Okay, we get I could do a whole sermon on leadership technique and wisdom and there's so much wisdom that we do need to talk about at some point. Uh but it's not really the issue. It should be that's all the boring stuff, guys. The organizational stuff. And if that's like your job, if you're an accountant or you're an organizational person, I'm not dissing you, okay? But let me just say this. The church is not a business. If you could run the church with all the perfect structures and you don't have men of God, you don't have the church. If the Holy Spirit didn't exist and the church could still function, what in the world are you doing? The church is the body of Christ, a living organism. It is the the temple of God. It is the bride of Christ. None of those things sound like, you know, corporate, you know, corporate here. How many pieces of flare do you have? None of that's there. I the Piper had a book back in the day I love. It's called Brothers, we are not professionals. Is remind us pastors that that we we we are not service providers. We're not executives. Yes, I wear a nice suit. It's not even a nice suit, but it fits me this time. But Moses' organization is great and it's helpful. None of the things that are happening here are bad. So why does Moses tell us this? Well, without getting too overly dramatic, you kind of know what's happening. I've already told you like 15 times. We go to Numbers chapter 13. Back to Numbers 13 because we saw this last week. We're just look at it briefly one more time. Numbers 15:17. 13:17 rather. The next scene that Moses is going to speak about next week is this. Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan. Who did he get to spy out the land of Canaan? Well, if you go back to earlier, he sent the chief among them. Verse two, he sent from the wilderness all the men who were heads of the people of Israel. Verse three, who did Moses send to spy out the land? the wise guys. Who did Moses send? He sent the organizational structure. Who did he send? He set the execs. Who did he send? He set the councils. He set the accountability groups. He said, "You guys go in and check it out." And what did he do? They went in and they saw what was in the land. And it did not and they they saw it was a land of milk and honey. And they came back, but they were afraid. They were afraid. And at the end of 40 days, verse 25, they returned from spying out the land. They came to Moses and Aaron and all the congregation of the people of Israel. They brought back word to them and showed them the fruit of the land. They said to him, "We came the land which you sent us and it flows with milk and honey and this is its fruit. However, the people who dwell in the land are strong and the seas are fortified and very large and besides we saw the descendants of Anoch there. The Amalachites dwell in the land of the Nab, the Hittites, the Jebusites, the Amorites dwell in the land of the hill country and the Canaanites dwell by the sea and all along the Jordan. Other words, they saw how challenging it was going to be to take it. But Caleb, one of those chiefs is a guy named Caleb. And he quieted the people before Moses said, "Let us go at once and occupy it, for we're all well, we are well able to overcome it." Then the men who had gone up with him said, "We're not able to go against the people, for they are stronger than we." And so they brought to the people of Israel a bad report of the land. They spied out, saying, "The land through which we've gone to spite out is a land that devours its inhabitants, and all the people that we saw in of great height. And there we saw the Nephilim, the sons of Anak who come from the Nephilim, and we seem to ourselves like grasshoppers. And so we seemed to them. Some people say, "Well, were the Nephilim really there?" And I'd argue, I don't think they were there at all. I think they died in the flood. I think they're lying. Then all the congregation raised a loud cry, and the people wept that night, and all the people of Israel grumbled against Moses and Aaron. Listen this. The whole congregation said to them, "Would that we had died in the land of Egypt? Oh, or would that we had died in this wilderness? wise Lord, bring us into this land to fall by the sword. Our wives and our little ones will become a prey. Would it not be better for us to go back to Egypt? And they said to one another, let us choose a leader and go back to Egypt. So much for accountability structures and councils here. And so Moses is, you know, it's not going well. If you look at verse 20, God gets pretty upset. Lord said, I I've pardoned according to your word and truly as I live all the as all the earth shall be filled with the glory. Lord, none of the men who see my glory, my signs I did in Egypt in the wilderness. You have put me to test these 10 times have not obeyed my voice shall see the land thy sword they give your fathers and none of those who despise me shall see it. these men that he's talking about were the wise men. And my argument for you is not that they weren't wise enough. My argument for you was not that they had a bad methodology. My argument for you is that they did not have faith. They had all the methods, all the organization. They had everything going the promises and the clarity and the whole thing, but they did not have faith. Let us organize more people. Let's let's here's another book. Let's organize more people. Go back to Egypt. I I remember all these these you're like, man, that's a bummer. We if only we we should get better organizations that doesn't happen to us, right? Well, look at the solution here. Verse 24. But my servant Caleb, because he has a different spirit, has followed me fully. I'll bring him into the land into which he went. And just so you don't miss it, go to Deuteronomy for a second because in the same sermon and you go down to verse 34, Deuteronomy 1:34, Moses himself said, uh, "The Lord heard your words and was angered and he swore not one of these men of this evil generation to see the good land that I swore to give your fathers." Now, that would be fine if Moses just making the case that you guys blew it. But he includes this very detail. None of them will have it except Caleb, the son of Japuna. He didn't know that on uh that that he shall see and to him and to his children I'll give the land on which he's trotten because he is holy follow the Lord. And there's also another guy named Joshua because Moses is going to throw himself under the bus and he's going to basically point them to follow Joshua into the land. But that's separate. My point right now is Moses makes it explicit. Their problem wasn't their methods, it was their men. Let me just say this way, guys. The church has never had better organization than it does right now. Never. Not just our church, churches in general, but but our church in particular. Our church is the most organized it's ever been, but church in general. We have endless methods, endless committees, endless accountability structures till we fail. Why? And guys, I just want to say this again because systems, no matter no matter how wise, no matter how good, no matter how organized, systems cannot produce faith. We don't need better methods. We need better men. Men of faith like Caleb. Interestingly, God has purportedly given us better men. Go to Ephesians chapter 4. This is where I get nervous because the point of the sermon is look at me. It's not what it is. I promise. Moses called elders. And I'm not arguing that he picked the wrong guys, but Matt, do you say we need better men? I do. I did say that. I don't think there was more wise people in the group. That's who they had. But we have something different today. In Ephesians 4, we're told this verse 11 talking about God says he gave the apostles, the prophets, the evangelists and shepherds and teachers to equip the saints for the work of the ministry for building up the body of Christ until we all attain to the unity of faith and to the knowledge of the son of God to mature manhood to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ that we no longer be children tossed to and fro by the waves and carried about by every wind of doctrine rather by human cunning and by craftiness and deceitful seems rather speaking the truth in love. were to grow up into every way into him who's the head into Christ from whom the whole body joined and held together by every joint with which is equipped when each part is working properly makes the body grow so that it builds itself up in love. How do we mature in the faith? How do we lead forward as God wants us to take that journey? He's saying God's like, "Well, I've appointed to you men, gifts, apostles, first of all, who wrote the Bible, evangelists who spread this word with missionaries essentially, shepherds and teachers to equip the saints. God's organization, in other words, in this church is spelled out. God gave them to the church. God has given them. They exist. If you're a pas a Christian right now, God has given you people that are supposed to help you. He's given you wise men, the rest of the thing. That's great. Notice he didn't spell out how these people are to organize. He didn't say, "I've given you organizational structures. I've given you a pope that's going to pass." Nope. He said, "I've given you gifts of shepherds and teachers." That's great. And yet, so many seem to fall, don't they? And so, what do we say when they fall? What do we say? Man, we need more accountability. You can't have that guy at the top. You can't do that. Why? Why do we say this? Now, I'm going to say something right now that sounds terrible. And again, I'm not saying that we don't need those things, but those things aren't the problem. So, why do we always focus on the problem? Why is it that when someone falls, we can't just say that it's a tragedy and that's not a man of God and it's bad? And the answer is that we need men of God. It's always the systems. Why? Why do we do this? WHY DO WE JUMP ON the things say, "Well, if it wasn't this and I did it, like, why? Why? Why? Why?" And I'll tell you if you stay in Ephesians and you go to chapter 5, let me get closer to home because I'm talking about elders, pastors, teachers. You're like, "Okay, I'm going to think about this for a second, Matt. Why do we keep saying that?" Well, I'll give you a reason. If you start with Ephesians 5, Paul tells them to be verse one. It says, "Be imitators of God as beloved children and walk in love as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us, a fragrant offering of sacrifice to God." And then he tells us all the places we're supposed to do that. Verse 22, wives, submit to your own husbands as the Lord. Verse 25, husbands, love your wives as Christ loved the church, right? Um, chapter 6 verse one, children obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. Chapter 6 verse 5, bond servants, obey your earthly masters with fear and trembling. Nine, verse 9, masters do the same to them and stop your threatening. Why do we focus on the methods and the systems with pastors and elders? For the same reason we focus on it in our marriages and in our parenting, in our workplaces. We collect books on techniques. We surround ourselves with more and more counsel because because if we just think to ourselves, the very thing we constantly search for is better technique and more systems and more discipline. as if that's the problem. And my friends, the thing that we have to realize right now is the problem is you. It's me. The reason that your marriage is hard is cuz you're in it. It's true. If if there was a heaven that you could go to now, you'd ruin it because heaven's for perfect people. And we're not perfect. You're a sinner who married another sinner. And yes, you're saved by grace. And yes, God is good. And yes, there's good news in all of this. But we have to first see what Moses getting to see is not the methodology. He's trying to get them to see their need. If we can only fix the structures and the methods and the techniques, I'd be a good parent. Date night. That's what it's going to help your marriage. And again, great. But you know what? I bet if you were married to Jesus, you wouldn't need a date night. I bet it'd still go well. So what do we do? Interestingly, in Ephesians 6:10, he kind of goes on and tells him what to do. Finally, be strong in the Lord and the strength of his might. This is what Moses is getting the Deuteronomy, the Israelites to do. This is the whole point of Deuteronomy. This is my whole point to you today is that we're creatures and we can't you know my like there's no structure like I I'm go crazy at the when this church is all through these the the 20 years of this church 18 years of church I I've I've racked my brain like I want to be so faithful and you think to yourself man these other people you watch the carnage of people falling around you and you know I realize at the end of the day you just have to keep throwing yourself on the mercy of God. I'm a creature. Need to be dependent upon him. And dare I say it, I need to be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his might. And how do you do that? Put on the whole armor of God that you may be able to stand against the schemes of the devil. And he goes on to describe the armor of God. This is not a sermon telling us to be a Caleb. It's not a sermon telling you to be like Jesus. Even the good news is not just that God gave us a better man to imitate. It's that he gave us a perfect man to inhabit. Jesus lived a life we couldn't live and he died the death we couldn't face. and he rose again and he ascended to heaven and set his holy spirit on those who put their faith in him who now dwells in us. He dwells in us today. We are literally called his body and that's not just a funny little like thing when we're focused on the church. The wilderness generation had Moses and they had the clear revelation promises of Abraham. They had structure. They had methodology. We have those things. But we also have Jesus in us. working through us. We need not better methodology, but men and women who actually believe that, who've actually have the courage to put on his armor in their marriage, in their home, in the church, and in the darkness. Israel's problem was never a lack of revelation. It was a refusal to trust the revelation they already had. And that's our problem, too. For many of you, the problem is not the Bi that the Bible is confusing. Oh, man. It's hard. The Bible's so hard. Well, that's not the stuff that's struggling that you struggle with, is it? The stuff we struggle with is the stuff that's pretty clear. It's not the hard parts of scripture, but the direct ones. Rejoice always. Give thanks in all circumstances. Forgive. Bless those who curse you. Put on Christ. But I I can't handle this one circumstance. Put on Christ. Rejoice always. I don't know if I can. I didn't say you could. I said, "Do it because Christ can. I don't know if I can live that way in my marriage." You can. Well, I want to deal with the technique. No, no, no. Put on Christ. Well, what about the technique? Who cares about that if you don't have Christ? Who cares if we're a bunch of goats pretending to be sheep? It doesn't matter. Put on Christ. That's the whole point of this whole thing. Put on Christ. For some of you, the truth is that you're this. You're not lacking any counsel. You're shopping for it. You need another conversation, another book, another podcast, another perspective. That's what you keep saying to yourself. Not because you don't know what to do, but because you're hoping someone will tell you something easier or better, you already know the step in front of you. So many of you, you know right now what that step is step is. Remember Ephesians, God's put good works in front of you. You guys know what they are. Whatever the next step is in your life, you know you need to forgive that person. You know you need to apologize. You know you need to tell the truth. You don't need to end the sin that you keep protecting. You know, to take the take the log out of your own eye. You know, you need to rejoice instead of complain. You know, you need to give thanks instead of rehearse your grievances. I don't know where in the Bible we have, well, let's get together and and have have like let's let's vent. I I don't know where that is in the Bible. You need to give sacrificially. How about you need to love sacrificial? You're told that's your command. That's what is the will of God. I don't know what God wants me to do. I could tell you a lot of things he wants you to do. I have so much stuff to work on. I can tell you exactly what to work on. You need to open the scripture, actually read it, and and to actually lead your family. And you guys do this amazing. You're the best people I know. So, I'm not rebuking you. I'm telling us, this is what we got to do. You know, you need to share the gospel with that co-orker, that friend maybe that you keep avoiding or maybe that annoying person that you're like, man, I don't even know if I want them to become a Christian and I got to be around them all the time. But you know what the next step is, and there's no amount of technique, and there's not another class you need to go to. There's not another thing you need to do. You can only fill the sponge up so long. The question isn't clarity. The question is courageous faith. Because obedience might cost you something. It may cost you your pride or your argument, your comfort, your reputation, your control. And that's where your faith is proven. Courageous faith is trusting Christ enough to obey him when obedience feels like losing. Israel had very specific promises. They had the best organization and they still rejected him. All except one man, Caleb. But we have a better man than that. The miracle of the gospel is that better man already walked the road. He was defrauded and mocked and stripped of honor. And yet he obeyed perfectly when obedience cost him everything. So I'm not telling you to fix your life. I'm telling you right this second, right this moment to put on Christ. And that because that very Christ right this moment lives in you and he wants to work in your life. This isn't a side emphasis in the Bible right now in the dark hard and messy place of your life right this second not tomorrow. Not after a counseling. Not after that next meeting. Not after that next talk. Not after that next conversation. Right today right now put on Christ. But for that to happen you have to first hear Moses words again. You've stayed long enough at this mountain. Turn and take your journey. Many of you stayed long enough on the mountain of these truths. You've heard them over and over again. Time to courageously believe them. It's time to turn to him and take the journey he's prepared for you. And it's time to turn from this mountain and take your journey. Let's pray. Father, thank you so much for the sermon of Moses. I pray that sermon would resonate with us. I do thank you for the wonderful, wise, and organizational things you've given us. Help us to have the right scaffolding to make church easier for us. But Lord, let us never mistake the need for godly men and women in our homes, in our workplaces, and in the in the church. Lord, I know that your people, these people, this church, need my holiness. They need me to be a man of God. Help me to be one. I can't do it without you. But I thank you. Help us to humbly ask for this and to pursue this. In Jesus name we pray. Amen.